Golden Age 《黄金时代》
Wang xiaobo 王小波
 
 
one  一  
 
When I was twenty years old, I was "jumping" in Yunnan. 　　我二十一岁时，正在云南“插队”。
 Chen Ching-yang was twenty-six years old, just when I jumped into the team as a doctor. 陈清扬当时二十六岁，就在我插队的地方当医生。
 I am under the foot of the fourteen teams in the mountains, she fifteen teams in the mountains. 我在山下十四队，她在山上十五队。
 One day she came down from the mountain, and I discussed her not the 'broken shoes'. 有一天她从山上下来，和我讨论她不是‘破鞋’的问题。
 At that time I did not know her, can only say that little know. 那时我还不大认识她，只能说有一点知道。
 The thing she wants to discuss is this: though all the people say she is a broken shoe, but she thinks she is not. 她要讨论的事是这祥的：虽然所有的人都说她是一个破鞋，但她以为自己不是的。
 Because the broken shoes to steal Han, and she did not laugh Han. 因为破鞋偷汉，而她没有愉过汉。
 Although her husband had lived for one year, she had not stolen. 虽然她丈夫已经住了一年监狱，但她没有偷过汉。
 Before this did not steal Han. 在此之前也未偷过汉。
 So she simply do not understand why people say she is broken shoes. 所以她简直不明白，人们为什么要说她是破鞋。
 If I want to comfort her, it is not difficult. 如果我要安慰她，并不困难。
 I can logically prove that she is not breaking shoes. 我可以从逻辑上证明她不是破鞋。
 If Chen Qingyang is broken shoes, that Chen Qingyang steal Han, then at least one of them stolen for it. 如果陈清扬是破鞋，即陈清扬偷汉，则起码有一个某人为其所偷。
 Now can not point out someone, so Chen Qingyang can not be established. 如今不能指出某人，所以陈清扬偷汉不能成立。
 But I say, Chen Qiangyang is broken shoes, and this is no doubt. 但是我偏说，陈清扬就是破鞋，而且这一点毋庸置疑。
  
Chen Qingyang find me to prove that she is not broken shoes, the reason is that I find her injections. 　　陈清扬找我证明她不是破鞋，起因是我找她打针。
 This is the following: when the captain is not busy when I do not call me plowing, but told me to transplant, so my waist can not often upright, know my people know that my waist has old injuries, and my height in a Rice nine or more. 这事经过如下：农忙时队长不叫我犁田，而是叫我去插秧，这样我的腰就不能经常直立，认识我的人都知道，我的腰上有旧伤，而且我身高在一米九以上。
 So inserted a month, I am back pain, do not fight can not sleep on the closed Our team of the medical room that a needle coating peeling, and have barbs, often my waist on the meat hook down. 如此插了一个月，我腰痛难忍，不打封闭就不能入睡。
 Later, my waist is like a shotgun, scars for a long time do not fade. 我们队医务室那一把针头镀层剥落，而且都有倒钩，经常把我腰上的肉钩下来。
 In this case, I think of the fifteen team doctor Chen Qingyang is a doctor of North Medical University graduate, the needle and the needle can probably distinguish, so I went to see her doctor, read the disease back, less than half an hour, She chased my house and asked me to prove that she was not shoes. 后来我的腰就像中了散弹枪，伤痕久久不褪。就在这种情况下，我想起十五队的队医陈清扬是北医大毕业的大夫，对针头和勾针大概还能分清，所以我去找她看病，看完病回来，不到半个小时，她就追到我屋里来，要我证明她不是破鞋。
 
Chen Ching Yang said she did not despise shoes in the slightest. 　　陈清扬说，她丝毫也不藐视破鞋。
 According to her observation, broken shoes are very kind, helpful, and most willing to disappoint. 据她观察，破鞋都很善良，乐于助人，而且最不乐意让人失望。
 So she has a little admiration for shoes. 因此她对破鞋还有一点钦佩。
 The problem is not good to break shoes, but rather that she is not broken shoes. 问题不在于破鞋好不好，而在于她根本不是破鞋。
 Just as a cat is not a dog. 就如一只猫不是一只狗一样。
 If a cat is called a dog, it will feel uncomfortable. 假如一只猫被人叫成一只狗，它也会感到很不自在。
 Now we all call her shoes, made her soul, almost even their own who do not know. 现在大家都管她叫被鞋，弄得她魂不守舍，几乎连自己是谁都不知道了。
  
Chen Ching-yang in my cottage, the bare arms of the red legs to wear a white coat, and she in the mountains that the same room as the attire, the difference is the loose hair with a handkerchief beam live, feet more A pair of slippers. 　　陈清扬在我的草房里时，裸臂赤腿穿一件白大褂，和她在山上那间医务室里装束一样，所不同的是披散的长发用个手绢束住，脚上也多了一双拖鞋。
 Looked at her look, I began to catch the mold: her white coat is wearing something under it, or nothing to wear. 看了她的样子，我就开始捉模：她那件白大褂底下是穿了点什么呢，还是什么都没穿。
 This can explain that Chen Qingyang is very beautiful, because she felt what to wear do not wear anything does not matter. 这一点可以说明陈清扬很漂亮，因为她觉得穿什么不穿什么无所谓。
 This is a self-confidence from childhood. 这是从小培养起来的自信心。
 I said to her, she is indeed a broken shoes, but also cite some reasons: the so-called broken shoes, but a allegation, we all say you are broken shoes, you are broken shoes, nothing to talk about. 我对她说，她确实是个破鞋，还举出一些理由来：所谓破鞋者，乃是一个指称，大家都说你是破鞋，你就是破鞋，没什么道理可讲。
 We say you stole the Han, you are stealing the Han, which is no reason to speak. 大家说你偷了汉，你就是偷了汉，这也没什么道理可讲。
 As for why we say that you are broken shoes, according to my opinion is this: we all think that married women do not steal Han, on the dark, breast sagging. 至于大家为什么要说你是破鞋，照我看是这样：大家都认为，结了婚的女人不偷汉，就该面色黝黑，乳房下垂。
 And your face is not black and white, breasts are not sagging and towering, so you are broken shoes. 而你脸不黑而且白，乳房不下垂而且高耸，所以你是破鞋。
 If you do not want to be broken shoes, it is necessary to face black, the breasts drooping, after others do not say you are broken shoes. 假如你不想当破鞋，就要把脸弄黑，把乳房弄下垂，以后别人就不说你是破鞋。
 Of course, this is a disadvantage, if you do not want to suffer, it should go to a Han. 当然这样很吃亏，假如你不想吃亏，就该去愉个汉来。
 So that you think you are a broken shoes. 这样你自己也认为自己是个破鞋。
 Others have no obligation to find out if you are stealing han and then decide whether to call you shook shoes. 别人没有义务先弄明白你是否偷汉再决定是否管你叫破鞋。
 You have the obligation to call someone else can not call you shoes. 你倒有义务叫别人无法叫你破鞋。
 Chen Qingyang listened to this, his face red, angry eyes wide open, almost hit me a slap in the face. 陈清扬听了这话，脸色发红，怒目圆睁，几乎就要打我一耳光。
 This woman hit a slap in the name, many people eat her slap in the face. 这女人打人耳光出了名，好多人吃过她的耳光。
 But she suddenly vented, said: Well, broken shoes on the broken shoes it. 但是她忽然泄了气，说：好吧，破鞋就破鞋吧。
 But it is not black, not your thing, she said, if I pondering too much in these things, it is likely to eat slap in the face. 但是垂不垂黑不黑的，不是你的事，她还说，假如我在这些事上琢磨得太多，很可能会吃耳光。
  
Retreated to twenty years ago, imagine me and Chen Qingyang discuss the case of shoes when the scene. 　　倒退到二十年前，想像我和陈清扬讨论破鞋问题时的情景。
 At that time I was looking yellow, lips dry, stained shredded and shredded hair, hair chaos, such as defeated brown, wearing a broken uniform, above a lot of holes are rubber paste on the stick, rocking his legs, sitting on the board Bed, is completely a rogue phase. 那时我面色焦黄，嘴唇干裂，上面沾了碎纸和烟丝，头发乱如败棕，身穿一件破军衣，上面好多破洞都是橡皮膏粘上的，跷着二郎腿，坐在木板床上，完全是一副流氓相。
 You can imagine Chen Qingyang heard so personal talking about her breast sagging sagging, the palm of your hand is how itchy. 你可以想像陈清扬听到这么个人说起她的乳房下垂不下垂时，手心是何等的发痒。
 She was a bit nervous, because there are a lot of fine men looking for her doctor, in fact, no disease. 她有点神经质，都是因为有很多精壮的男人找她看病，其实却没有病。
 Those people are not actually to see the doctor, but to see shoes. 那些人其实不是去看大夫，而是去看破鞋。
 Only with my exception. 只有我例外。
 My waist seems to be built by the pig eight two cake. 我的后腰上好像被猪八戒筑了两粑。
 Regardless of low back pain really, light that hole can become a doctor to see the reasons. 不管腰疼真不真，光那些窟窿也能成为看医生的理由。
 These holes make her have a hope, that is, may prove to me that she is not a broken shoe, a person admitted that she is not broken shoes, and no one admitted that big difference. 这些窟窿使她产生一个希望，就是也许能向我证明，她不是破鞋，有一个人承认她不是破鞋，和没人承认大不一样。
 But I let her down. 可是我偏让她失望。
  
I think so: if I want to prove that she is not broken shoes, you can prove that she is not broken shoes, that thing is too easy. 　　我是这么想的：假如我想证明她不是破鞋，就能证明她不是破鞋，那事情未免太容易了。
 In fact, I can not prove anything, except those that do not need to prove. 实际上我什么都不能证明，除了那些不需证明的东西。
 In the spring, the captain said that I had blinded the left eye of his family's bitch, making it always overturned, as if he were playing ballet, and since then he had given me a small shoe. 春天里，队长说我打瞎了他家母狗的左眼，使它老是偏过头来看人，好像在跳芭雷舞，从此后他总给我小鞋穿。
 I want to prove my innocent innocence, only the following three ways: 我想证明我自己的清白无辜，只有以下三个途径： 
1, the captain's home does not exist a bitch; 2, the bitch born no left eye; 3, I am no hand, can not shoot the gun. 　　１、队长家不存在一只母狗；２、该母狗天生没有左眼；３、我是无手之人，不能持枪射击。
  
The result is three one does not hold. 　　结果是三条一条也不成立。
 Captain's family does have a brown bitch, the bitch's left eye is indeed blind day after tomorrow, and I can not only gun shooting, and the gun is extremely fine. 队长家确有一棕色母狗，该母狗的左眼确是后天打瞎，而我不但能持枪射击，而且枪法极精。
 Shortly before this, I also borrowed Luo Xiao four of the guns, with a bowl of green beans to do bullets, in the empty grain warehouse to lay the two pounds of rats. 在此之前不久，我还借了罗小四的汽枪，用一碗绿豆做子弹，在空粮库里打下了二斤耗子。
 Of course, there are a lot of people in this team marksmanship, including Luo Xiao four. 当然，这队里枪法好的人还有不少，其中包括罗小四。
 The gun is his, and he hit the captain of the bitch, I looked at the side. 汽枪就是他的，而且他打瞎队长的母狗时，我就在一边看着。
 But I can not expose others, Luo Xiao four and I am also good. 但是我不能揭发别人，罗小四和我也不错。
 Not to mention the captain if it can provoke a small Luo Si, will not look for me. 何况队长要是能惹得起罗小四，也不会认准了是我。
 So I keep silent. 所以我保持沉默。
 Silence is the default. 沉默就是默认。
 So I went to the spring of planting, sticking in the ground like a half of the pole, after the autumn I went to cattle, can not eat hot rice. 所以春天我去插秧，撅在地里像一根半截电线杆，秋收后我又去放牛，吃不上热饭。
 Of course, I will not do anything. 当然，我也不肯无所作为。
 One day in the mountains, I just borrowed Luo Xiao four of the gun, the captain's home bitch just ran to the mountains told me to see, I shot a bullet hit its right eye. 有一天在山上，我正好借了罗小四的汽枪，队长家的母狗正好跑到山上叫我看见，我就射出一颗子弹打瞎了它的右眼。
 The dog has neither the left eye nor the right eye, it can not run back to let the captain see - God knows where it went. 该狗既无左眼，又无右眼，也就不能跑回去让队长看见——天知道它跑到哪儿去了。
  
I remember those days, in addition to the mountains and cattle lying at home, it seems that nothing did. 　　我记得那些日子里，除了上山放牛和在家里躺着，似乎什么也没做。
 I think nothing has nothing to do with me. 我觉得什么都与我无关。
 But Chen Qingyang ran down from the mountain to find me. 可是陈清扬又从山上跑下来找我。
 The original has another rumor that she and I engage in shoes. 原来又有了另一种传闻，说她在和我搞破鞋。
 She wants me to give us innocent proof of innocence. 她要我给出我们清白无辜的证明。
 I said, to prove that we are innocent, only to prove the following two points: 我说，要证明我们无辜，只有证明以下两点： 
1, Chen Qingyang is a virgin; 2, I was days of castration of the people, no sexual intercourse. 　　１、陈清扬是处女；２、我是天阉之人，没有性交能力。
  
These two points are difficult to prove. 　　这两点都难以证明。
 So we can not prove ourselves innocent. 所以我们不能证明自己无辜。
 I tend to prove that I am not innocent. 我倒倾向于证明自己不无辜。
 Chen Qingyang listened to these words, first angry face white, and then flushed, and finally stood silent and stood up. 陈清扬听了这些话，先是气得脸白，然后满面通红，最后一声不吭地站起来走了。
  
Chen Qingyang said, I am always a villain. 　　陈清扬说，我始终是一个恶棍。
 She first wanted me to prove that she was innocent, I turned a bunch of supercilious, and then began to nonsense, the second time she wanted me to prove that we both innocent, I solemnly suggested to her once a sexual intercourse. 她第一次要我证明她清白无辜时，我翻了一串白眼，然后开始胡说八道，第二次她要我证明我们俩无辜，我又一本正经地向她建议举行一次性交。
 So she decided, sooner or later to hit me a slap in the face. 所以她就决定，早晚要打我一个耳光。
 If I knew she had such a plan, maybe the back of things would not happen. 假如我知道她有这样的打算，也许后面的事情就不会发生。


